So just a few quick announcements, so the course team and I are starting to go through the early course feedback that you've all provided.
If you haven't had a chance to fill out that form, please do so, especially next week about the CIA meeting and the TFW meeting.
The agenda is to discuss the feedback from all of you. So I we very much appreciate that.
We'll try to incorporate as many of the ideas as we can. Also, problems at seven is due Wednesday.
So we're kind of, of course, back on our usual schedule. Problems at seven is one that I definitely think you should look over today.
All of the problems are will be doable after today's class. That includes actually the Web work that's due for next week, too.
So you should be well prepared for that.
But I think it's a good idea to have these problems floating around in your mind over the
weekend so you can have time to process them and get the full point of those questions.
Again, I'll just remind you,
I think I've met with about one hundred and eighty of the two hundred students or two hundred and ten students in this class.
So if you are among the 20 or 30 students who haven't yet met with me yet, I'm still, of course, to meet with you and this earlier in the semester.
But there's a limit to how many hours there are in the day. I'm also happy to open this up now if people just want to schedule other meetings with me.
Of course, you've always been welcome to do that. But this is a convenient way.
If you want to just know whether I'm available,
you can schedule a time and you doesn't have to strictly be for the introductory meetings at this point.
In terms of the reading you should be reading along with the material.
As we go into Chapter four, I will sort of remind you or mention that Chapter four tends to be another big jump in abstraction.
This course, which is a place where students tend to need a little bit more time to fully internalize those ideas.
So just keep that in mind. I think doing the reading along with this material will be crucial as you go through it,
especially if you've never seen it before, especially are there any questions about sort of logistics as we get going here?
Questions. All right, so we have about five minutes from last class to finish up,
what we were thinking about is trying to give some additional interpretations for what the determinant is.
The primary thing that we've done with determinant so far is we've motivated the definition as trying to capture the notion of inevitability.
And then we went through some effort to prove that it actually did what we hoped in general.
So for an end by and matrix, that matrix will be inevitable if and only if the determinant is non-zero.
So that sort of cofactors definition that we gave for the determinant actually does capture that notion and does what we want.
As many people pointed out, even while we were doing that, it's also true that we had many other ways of capturing the inevitability of a matrix.
It's not, strictly speaking, only the determinant that does that for us, but it does foreshadow some of the concepts coming up later.
In addition to that, we also want to think about are there other ways of interpreting what the determinant does for us?
And that's what we were getting at at the end of last class, is how else can we think about the determinant?
What geometric properties is it also encoding for us?
So that's what I want to do for the last few minutes of today's class or the last few minutes of that topic,
rather, is think about what this is really telling us.
So the starting point, if you'll recall from last time, was to take a linear transformation.
T from R to to R to so we could easily visualize it and we did a specific instance of this last time, so we're sort of well motivated.
We had the idea that T of the unit square would scale by the determinant the area of T of the unit square.
So then giving a larger rectangle in that case last time.
The determinant was telling us how the area changed by this linear transformation,
so we would like to know that observation persists in more generality.
So let's try it in a more general setting. So let's take a general two by two matrix.
So I'll just give names to the entries, A, B, C, D times the vector X.
So there's my linear transformation, so I want to think about what this thing actually does.
So, again, we want to know what it does say to the unit square. So the way that we usually visualize linear transformations are linear functions
as we think about what happens to regions in the domain when you apply them.
Linear transformation. So we have one and one.
Here is my unit square. There's the unit square.
Now, I would like to apply t to this thing. Well, I'm just going to draw a generic picture.
To represent what's happening here and so when I draw this generic picture,
I'm just going to draw it in the first quadrant and things work out the same way if you're careful with signs in the other quadrants as well.
So if all the entries and I happen to be positive, well, then this will map to a vector like this.
The first vector one zero will map to the first column.
The second column represents where we send zero one.
So that will then map to say B b.
And then the unit square sends linear combinations of all the points in here to linear combinations of these,
which then results in us filling out this parallelogram. So this region is then T of.
So in order to generalize the observation that we were thinking up about last time, as we would like to know how the area of this region compares,
so namely how we could use the determinant to then tell me what this is going to be.
So this has area one. So I would like to know the a way of thinking about the area of the shape.
This parallelogram, well, one sort of nice thing that we could do here is we could cut up the shape.
So. It's a little bit of surgery.
And we cut this shape to then move a portion of this, so we take this triangle.
And we move it down here, so then what it does is it fills in this region.
There. So that gives us another parallelogram. It has the exact same area because I obtained it by just cutting and rearranging this point over here.
What will that point be on the y axis? Given where I made this cut.
D Right, it'll be the Y coordinate of this point, so that'll be D, so if I wanted to know the area then this region now,
so this parallelogram which will have the same area as my original thing.
It's the area of a parallelogram, so I just need to multiply the height of the parallelogram times, the length of the base.
All right, so just going back to high school geometry, well, it's not immediately obvious what this length is, certainly.
So one way that we could get at what that length is, is we could write down the equation of this line.
So let's write down the equation of that line. We know, for instance, it goes to the point AC so this would be, say, the line.
Why the line?
Will be why minus C is equal to the slope times X, minus A, what's the slope of this line?
Well, the slope of that line be. What is it?
So it's parallel to this line, right, so you just want to know what the slope of this line is,
so then you want to know what's the change in X or the change in Y over the change
in X or the Y coordinate is D and the B coordinate the the Y coordinate is D,
the X coordinate is B, so the change in Y over change in X is then driver B, right.
So de. Over, so now what am I looking for from this line?
What do I want? In order to find the length of this base, right, sorry, I thought you might have your hand up.
Does anyone have a. I guess how would I find that point?
That's. We want the X intercept, so, right, we just plug in Y zero and solve for X, so when Y equals zero and we get well plug in Y equals zero.
So then I'm going to multiply both sides by B over D, so I get minus B, C over D is equal to X minus A.
So then we get this length here. Will be the solving for X, so A minus B, E over D.
So then that tells me the area. Of T applied to the unit square, the area of this quantity will be equal to, well, the height we've decided was D.
The length of the base of this parallelogram was A minus B, C or D.
So now if I just multiply through. A D minus C.
Which is what? That is just the determinant of a general two by two matrix.
There is one strong reaction that everyone else is like, yes, of course, that's what you told us, it would be OK.
So then we get that this is actually the determinant showing up here.
So we see then what the determinant is, just giving us the area of this particular parallelogram.
So this gives a geometric interpretation of what the determinant is in terms of calculating some area.
Let's make sure we really understand that. So what does it mean again, if say that it was equal to zero, what would that mean about your matrix a.
It's not inevitable, right, so then the inevitable matrix theory would tell you what about the columns of that matrix?
There, linearly dependent. Right. So then what would that how those columns would look geometrically?
How could they look? They would then lie in the same line, for instance, or they could just be the origin in both of those cases.
What is the volume that those columns generate for the area, rather, that those columns generate zero.
So it makes sense. It connects back with the interpretation we had before.
If they happen to be linearly dependent, columns are parallelogram would just be on the same line.
There would be no area. OK, so this gives us at least another way of thinking about what the determinant does for us in terms of calculating the area.
So let's record that as a theorem so we can use it.
So if A is a two by two matrix.
Then. The area of the parallelogram.
Parallelogram. Generated.
By the columns of a. Is the absolute value, the determinant?
So that gives us a way of thinking about the determinant geometrically, visually,
not just in terms of characterizing and readability, what we can do the same thing for three by three and higher.
Savir. So the sign is going to tell you how it's arranged in terms of the columns in the in the quadrants, so it's going to tell you.
How that looks, if you're only interested in the area, though, we do want to take the absolute value and not worry about Signoria.
If we go to three by three, we can do the same thing.
So if A is a three by three matrix. So then we'd like to think about what this would mean.
So now we have three columns living in our three and we'd like to think about what happens if you now take,
say, the image under the transformation of multiplying by this matrix.
A. of the unit cube in our three. What do you think would happen to the unit KUB?
What would this look like, Gwen? We'll be sort of like a parallel pipe.
So the geometric picture that you should have in mind when you're thinking about this in our three will be the following.
So if we're thinking about this in our three. So and is equal to three.
So we have our Matrix A has the columns U, V and W.
So then. It's going to look like a bunch of parallel sides.
So now where am I parallelogram? It is coming from one side length or parallel pipe in one side length will be, say, you, the NWT.
So I'm taking all linear combinations of those three vectors where the coefficients are allowed to range from zero to one.
And I'm filling out that region in space.
So the result then is that the determinant in that case is going to be telling you about the volume of that shape?
So then the volume. Of the parallel prepared.
Generated by the columns of the three columns of a.
Is the absolute value of the determinant of a.
So this interpretation of the derivative, of the derivative of the determinant as giving you a geometric notion still holds true.
Let's go back to this picture for a second and try to do the same kind of analysis. What if W the vector W was a linear combination of you and V.
Then what would the volume inclosed be? Zero, right?
How what would the inevitability of your matrix be like?
It would not be convertible, right, because you have one of the columns, namely W as a linear combination of you and V,
therefore the convertible matrix theorem tells you the columns are linearly dependent. So your matrix is then not convertible.
So again, we get that same idea of how geometrically we can see the determinate becoming zero is telling.
We have zero volume, which is telling us something about the dependent's relations among those factors.
So again, just trying to tie back that geometric interpretation to our theoretical interpretation.
Dropped a letter. OK, so we can use this result now, I guess the third point I'll put here is that more generally we can do this.
For any linear transformation, I'll just say for a linear transformation from our two to our two,
but if you did a linear transformation going from Yes question.
To talk about the sign of the determinate, yeah,
there is a way of thinking about how that's going to look depending on like how the vectors are arranged.
And you could even think about how like if you permuted the vectors, what's that going to do to the sign?
Just like when we were thinking about permitting the rows of a matrix, we know that that changes the sign.
So if you wrote the vectors in a different order, you'd be changing the design of the expression that you have.
So, yeah, that's a good point.
But the nice thing about this is most of what we've been doing has been in our end, so when we go into higher dimensions,
we can also think about an n dimensional volume and use that the determinant to to capture that notion of an N dimensional volume as well,
which is a very useful theoretical notion, especially as we move into 20 to be next semester.
So more generally, if we have a linear transformation t say, going from one hour to an hour to.
Subquestion. There are questions. Yes, Mike.
So the department would still be zero because those three vectors together linearly dependent, so the determinant would still be zero.
You could ask that about the two vectors that were generating the plane.
Those two you could think about those is generating some kind of an area and trying to calculate that using a determinant as well.
It's mildly it's a little tricky to do that because those vectors would be living in our three.
But in principle, you could.
So more generally, the determinant is telling us how your area or volume or interdimensional volume will scale under this linear transformation,
so namely that it is linear. Um, maybe I'll just.
No, I won't stay for, um.
Then the area or volume of T applied to some finite region s will just be equal to the absolute value of the determinant of a times the area of S.
So whatever finite region you had in the plane has some area. The amount it's going to change is multiplying by the determinant.
So this tells us how things change and our linear transformation.
This observation is actually wildly generalizable and one of the main results of math.
Twenty to be that even if you have a nonlinear function here, so even if you're doing some kind of nonlinear optimization,
which certainly comes up in lots of applications and economics and computer science,
you're doing a nonlinear optimization problem here,
then the area or volume will scale by approximately the determinant of what we'll call the derivative of that matrix of that transformation.
OK, so then that gives us a nice result. One of the major theorems of vector calculus there is to generalize exactly this statement.
So the determinants are very important for two reasons in our course.
One reason is to connect back with invert ability and the fundamental question of solving systems of equations.
The second place where they're extremely important is in thinking about what they mean geometrically and capturing that geometric notion.
So this comes up a lot when you're doing, say, changes of coordinates in physics,
thinking about how that change of coordinates is going to impact your calculations.
So that's for now what I want to say about determinants and how they connect back to different topics.
But they will certainly show up again in other courses that you take.
Yes, Tommy. So the three by three is actually kind of a cool thing.
Like if you want to prove the same, will you? Do you prove the same kind of geometric thing where I could slice parallel to one of the planes and move
that region down to kind of assemble it into an object that's easier to read off the area of that thing?
Through. You can use vectors, but I mean, at some stage you want to compute exactly what the lengths of various sides would be.
But yeah, I mean, the way that you could do it is you could slice it up, rearrange it to blend, be an easier shape to work with.
OK, so one of the big themes of math. Twenty two has been to abstract ideas.
So when we see a particular idea showing up that seems useful, we want to find the essence of that idea and turn that into a new type of object.
So one place that we saw this coming up a lot earlier in the course was, for instance, we are thinking about equivalence relations.
There are lots of instances where that shows up the idea of equivalent matrices, the idea of equivalent system equations.
I mean, those are not literally the same thing, but they were capturing the same essence.
They were answering the same sort of question. And so then we abstract it out that that quality of being an equivalence relation.
And then we're able to prove lots of things about general equivalence relations from that.
What we want to do now is that the first half of this course has been about working in R and R and seems like a wonderful place to work.
There are lots of great things about it. We can see things and visualize them very nicely and we can answer lots of questions in this context.
We can represent lots of physical problems as problems, mathematical problems in our end itself.
OK. So the goal is to generalize the structure that we're studying here.
OK, so the goal.
As we want to abstract. The essential qualities of our end to a more general structure, which we're going to call a linear space or a vector space,
this structure then captures a wide range of places where our analysis in our end goes through nearly the same way.
So it turns out that a lot of the techniques,
a lot of the machinery that we've been developing over the last six weeks then can be used in a wider context.
So we would like to be able to do that. So in order to do that,
when we're going to do is we're going to take what are the properties that we
really wanted about AURIN enabled in order to prove all these other things.
All right. So definition. So the things about N that I liked were kind of the following.
It was some set on which I had two operations. I could add those two factors together and I could scale a given vector.
Those were fundamentally the things that I was using. So what I want to do is to find an abstract set that has two operations on it.
So we're going to define a real vector space.
Is A set B, along with two operations.
So where to find that before we defined a structure on our equivalence or a structure on our set using equivalence relations?
Along with two operations. So namely, we have addition.
And scalar multiplication. All right, so we don't just want these operations to just exist, they are not just arbitrary,
we want them to have the same sorts of properties they had in our ND.
So we want them to satisfy the following 10 conditions. So we want them to satisfy the following axioms.
All right. So in all my statements that I'm considering here, I'm going to have.
These elements, you V and W as elements in this V on which I'm defining this structure, I do want to make sure the set is non-empty.
Just to avoid that kind of. Possibility that will actually follow from some of our conditions anyway, but just to emphasize that,
I want to say a non-empty set and then I'll take my Scalars, C and D to be in the real numbers.
So this is the part where you're defining it to be a real vector space.
If I wanted to say a complex vector space than my scalars could live in the complex numbers.
If you wanted a different kind of vector space, you could take your scalars to live in a different set.
But most of the time, we'll be working in R or C.
Your problem is that gives you another example of a good field to work in for your scalars, too.
So the first thing that I want to have happen is that if I took two vectors in my space,
like if I took an element or two and I added it to another element in our two, I'd like to make sure that I'm still in order to be kind of weird.
If I added two things with two components and I end up with something with 17 components.
So this is what I'm going to call being closed under Ed. So you plus we should be an element in my vector space.
This is called being closed under. Ed.
All right. Second property that we want to have happen is in our too, if I added X plus Y, that's the same thing as adding Y plus X.
This is common activity. So I want you plus V to be equal to V plus you.
So just compatibility of addition. So just like before.
So all of the properties we want here, we want them to be just like what happens in our N James.
Well, the defining it matters to because I can't define the operation without knowing the objects that I'm defining it on,
just like when I define a function, I need to see what the domain and QUARTERMAIN are.
It's really a property of both. I'd also like associativity to hold,
so you plus the plus W should be the same thing as V plus you plus V plus W and again these should be true for all vectors, UVA and W.
In Oregon, one thing that we use a lot is that we have a zero vector, so inside of any vector space, I want there to be a zero vector.
So what does it seem like is fundamental about the zero vector? How can I characterize what it does to another vector?
Cameron. Exactly right at the additive identity element, so if I just add it to a given vector, we get back to the vector that we plugged in.
So there should exist some element which I'm going to label the vector space that it's in.
We'll call it zero. But sometimes we write at sub here.
If there are a lot of vector spaces lurking around, it's sometimes nice to be able to distinguish which zero we're talking about.
So there exists some element in V so that.
The zero vector plus you is just equal to you for all, no matter what you you worked with by ad zero to it, I just get back to you again.
The next thing that we use a lot in our end is the fact that we can take the negative of a given vector so we have an additive inverse.
I want the same thing to be true in my abstract vector space. So given a vector, you then there should exist a vector negative you.
So there exists a vector which we call negative you inside of, so that you plus negative you is equal to the zero vector.
So there's all we can always add to a given vector, something to get to the zero vector.
Now we want to do our properties for scalar multiplication. So four six.
I want to also not be able to scale outside of my space. Yes.
So that's a good point. So one thing that I'm doing here deliberately is I'm no longer writing the overline on these elements.
And the reason for that is because now we're vector's can be more general types of objects rather than just tuples in our.
So we want to then sort of think about them as more abstract objects.
And so it'll get confusing if we continue to write the line over each element to distinguish them,
we're going to have to now use from context whether something is a vector or a scalar.
That's a great point to notice that doing that. So that's good. So here.
We want to make sure that if I scaled my vector by any real number, we're still in the set.
Tommy should have. I mean, many textbooks will use a bold for them.
Again, I don't think that's the best notation because it.
Sort of conflates two directly with what happens in our NT and now our vectors are going to
be lots of different types of objects and so they won't necessarily just be tuples anymore.
So I'm sort of I want to make this distinguishing point to kind of make it clear that we're now working in this more abstract setting.
But it's also very difficult to write Bould on a chalkboard.
So I work on your piece of paper like it's been forever shading and end to make sure it's really clearly bold.
So the other properties we had in Orange is that scalar multiplication and vector addition sort of behave nicely.
So namely if I take C times you plus V, well then the scalar would just distribute through.
So this becomes C you perceive. So we have that distributed.
Also, we could distribute the vector. If we had to see.
You know, we can distribute the vector through to get see you plus the again properties that we've seen a lot in the case of the real numbers.
We'd also like to make sure that if we took C.
Times the vector did apply to you the same. No, those two scalars and then applied it to the actor, so it doesn't matter if you first multiply,
see India's real numbers and then apply it to the scalar,
or if you applied to the vector and then applied see to the output of that, you'd get the same result either way.
Roy. Is there? A vector is an element in this set, it's just any element in a vector space.
So a vector is any element in a vector space now. But the general definition, so if I talk about a scalar now,
it'll be an element in the real numbers in this case, because I'm talking about a real vector space.
Let's see. I'm sorry, you said.
Yeah, then it's closed and rescaling application, that's exactly right. Good question. And then there was a question over here, where did the.
So the defining factor as. Or RN.
Yeah, it's just an element in some vector space. It could be in our end, but it could be on a different vector space.
Currently our is our only vector space, but there could be others.
It's not a very good notion if there are no others, Jonathan, that you can say something out of that.
That's actually a really interesting question that where you start to study all of this particular
mathematical structure together and study what kind of structure that space would have.
I mean, I think your piece that kind of gets at that, where I talk about the power of a given set,
which is the power of a given set, is the set of all subsets of a given fixed set.
So it's kind of the same notion here.
You might think about what are the set of all vector spaces and what structure does that have is that there's that thing, a vector space.
So that's a really good question. So I should put it with the others, but there's one more axiom number 10.
Last but not least. If I scale by the real number one, it should behave like multiplicative identity.
So namely, I should just get back one, just get back to Victor.
OK, so the first remark that I want to make here is one that I think people have already made,
but just to make sure that it appears in your notes and then I'll answer your question. So the first remark.
Is that elements? V.
Are called vectors, so if you have any elements in a vector space, they're called vectors.
So this is what we mean by vector space, so you sailor. When 10 would not be true, I mean,
the only the the ways in which it won't be true will be kind of silly examples where we almost define it not to be true.
So to give them a better example, I mean, maybe I should we could talk about it later.
It's one thing that you'll notice about these axioms in general is that they're actually not asking for that much, even though there are ten of them.
So and they're pretty natural, given the types of objects you've worked with before.
So to make one of them fail, we're almost doing it sort of deliberately to make them fail.
So it's like when we first talked about sets, there's there's no structure.
It's just a set. But then we start putting a little bit more structure on it, a little bit more structure to then get additional properties.
Let's see, Tommy. What if no one is going into the.
It has to be because we're doing this is over the real numbers is our scalars, so the one is the scalar.
So we don't have a notion of a vector space without a scalar field attached to it.
So we always have to have a base thing that we're going to use to scale these numbers by.
In our case, it's either the real numbers of the complex numbers.
Or this one exception on our piece, which will be the field with two elements, zero and one and that one.
Yeah, this one this one right here is not a vector, it's a scalar, it's the real number one.
So one is an element in our. Yes.
That's a great point. So, like, what do you want to consider art itself?
So I would then be it would be a vector space. We later will use the word one dimensional vector space attached to it.
But then if you replace real with complex here, then there's this notion of complex numbers.
We usually think of that as two real dimensions of the real axis in the imaginary axis.
So then there is a point where you need to be careful about whether you're talking
about whether this is the scalars or complex numbers of the scalars are real numbers.
Nearly the entire time in this class will be working over the real numbers,
but the real numbers themselves are then a vector space, a real vector space.
That's a great point. So what we need to do today for the rest of our time is we want to build a library of vector spaces.
Any time you encounter a new mathematical object,
you want to get enough examples of that type of mathematical object that you have an idea of how it works,
how is it different from the thing you were trying to abstract away? So I think it's important to develop this library.
So goal is we want to build some intuition through a library of examples.
A vector spaces. So really, that's what I hope to do for the rest of class, basically,
and then we want to start getting at how we understand the structure of a vector space itself.
It's just like if you're in chemistry, you want to study the structure of a molecule or an atom or something,
you want to understand what are the constituent pieces, how can you understand that big object?
Well, our first example, the whole point of this is we were basically just writing down properties of our and that's how we got our list of axioms.
So our first example. Is are I think, of calling this example a R in itself?
So this thing is a real vector space for. But if that's the only instance of this, it's not as useful of a notion,
we'd like to make sure that there are some other examples that we can work into.
So one simple extension of this that we could take is we could say, think about the space of sequences or the set of sequences.
So here I'm going to call this set X because it's the set of sequences.
So this will be the set of tuples where you have an infinite number of components.
So where the Y one by two by three got to where Weich is an element in order for all.
OK, in the natural numbers. So that alone is not enough to decide what to say, what a vector space is.
What do we now need to have these two operations as well? How could I combine together two sequences?
What might I do with them in order to get another sequence? So I want to define addiction in this context.
Yes. Fervent.
So we could define the addition of these two sequences to just be component wise, as you were describing,
so I'm going to describe the sum of these two things, Z, one, Z to that plus Y one, Y two.
That is equal to by definition. This is how we're defining our operation in this case, Z one plus Y one, Z two plus Y to that.
That and again, this defines another element in us. Or might we define scalar multiplication.
What should the time, though, sequence be? Yeah.
Robert. So I just take the scaler and I scale by every term in my sequence to then get another sequence,
so I have to find it again to be the scaling operation that works component wise.
You can go through each of these properties. So by the positivity of adding real numbers will have associativity here.
What would the zero vector be in this vector space? Jonathan, instead of infinite zeros or the tuple of infinite zeros.
So this would then be zero zero zero.
So just like the zero vector in our end is a tuple of zeros, the zero sequence will now be an infinite number of zeros.
And you can go through all of the properties here and verify that they work. So this gives us another vector space.
Then our friend, we can work with the set of sequences sometimes people call this space are infinity, so sometimes people use the notation.
Our affinity for this is this space. This is a vector space.
All right, so what I want to do is I have see through I here on my hand out for today,
what I thought would be fun to do is to take a moment with just maybe the person next to you go through as many as you can in just a few minutes.
Pick the ones who seem most interesting to you and decide, is this a vector space or is this not a vector space?
So let's just take a few minutes and try this. Peter.
Let's come back together. Let's come back together. So it's great to hear so much discussion again, that's really warms my heart.
So when we're thinking about, see, what is this set, what is the set work considered considering and see?
When things like X Y.
So what will that what does that look like? It's the circle right to the set we're considering is the set how are the operations defined?
How are the operations defined for this case? What does it say?
At the usual operations, right? So these are elements in order to there's just a subset of our too.
And so we want to know, could we add them together in the usual way? So let's just pick some vectors and see what happens.
So, for instance, here, the vector one zero is an element in this set.
So let's suppose I add that vector to itself. Well, one zero plus one zero is equal to under the usual operations to zero.
Well, that's not an element in our set. What letter did I use for the set?
What does it what's the actual notation?
Is it A, A, that's B, OK, so this is the not thank you, not an element in V, so if this is the set, so then it's not closed.
So this is not a vector space. It is a subset of our two, it's a perfectly nice one.
It's an important one, but it's definitely not a vector space with the usual operations.
OK. All right, let's see, what about D this was done on the set of polynomials,
so this was this set so p n where not plus a one T plus DataDot up to A and T to the
end where all of these coefficients are allowed to be any real number whatsoever.
What do you think about this one? Jonathan.
It is a vector space, in fact, so let's just think about it for I get to convince ourselves of that.
If I add a polynomial degree or less to another polynomial degree and are less high, then definitely get a polynomial degree and are less.
What would the zero factor be in this vector space? So what would zero.
Yeah. Maybe the zero polynomial, exactly. That's wonderful.
So if you have the zero polynomial, you take all the coefficient to be zero zero times T plus zero times T squared plus dot,
dot, dot Lazerow times T to the end. So this is then a function.
Now it's a polynomial that's still a vector, which is a little bit weird.
OK, this is then a little bit pulling beyond what we've thought of as vectors before.
So this is the zero vector in the space of polynomials of degree.
And unless it is the zero polynomial where all the the coefficients of that polynomial are zero for E,
we have the space of N by N matrices, which featured prominently when we were thinking about the determinant,
because in that case we were trying to define a function on this set that
would characterize convertibility now asking about the structure of that set.
So we add polynomial or we add and by n matrices in the usual way, and then we add their corresponding components.
We scale matrices in the usual way that we scale every component.
And then we've thought about a lot of properties of these operations.
In particular, we've observed that the most of the vector space axioms hold already.
So in this case, we'll get yet another vector space. So this is a vector space.
What would the zero vector be in this vector space? Let's make it two by two to make it really concrete.
What's the zero vector in the space of two by two matrices? S.
What? Zero zero zero zero perfect, right, but it's arranged as a two by two matrix, right?
So this is the zero vector in the space of two by two matrices.
So you need to make sure that when we're talking about the zero vector in a particular vector space, it must be an element of that set.
Like. You can have the zero vector.
Oh, you're right, but that's a different part of the structure, right? So you're saying that there's actually more operations lurking around here.
There's additional structure, which is a really great observation in the space of ENVI and matrices.
We don't just have additions and scalar multiplication. We also have a way of multiplying and by and matrices to which wasn't true in our.
I didn't have a way of multiplying a vector in our end with another vector in our end in order to get an output vector in our end.
So you're noticing that some of these sets actually have additional structure, which could be really nice to know.
That's a great point. So this is not the end of the structures that you could study, but it's just the starting point.
If you take a class like math, one twenty two, it's the abstract algebra course,
and that's where you then study additional structures that you could have on lots of different types of sets.
Question. There we go. All right, so this one is a vector space.
What about let's see, f what do people think about this one or.
If it's not closed. So not a vector space.
All right, what about G? Gee, was that a vacuum space?
No one not. So, yeah, you want this to some and you know that the some of this factor for any vector,
say, X Y, would then be equal to you in this case, a plus X zero.
Right. That's the one I'm thinking of, the perfect example. Right.
So then in order for this to become the zero vector, we would then we want this to come out to be the same thing as B, but a B were non-zero.
There is no way we could make that happen. So then there's no zero vector.
Great point. No zero vector.
OK, what about H the people thing about H.
Not not that, not. Right, not the vector space, for instance, noncommutative.
OK, what about this last one, I mean, what do people think about I?
That's Anthony. This one is so this is the space of functions.
This one is actually extremely important. So this is. This is a vector space.
So then what we're talking about the space of functions here, yeah.
And almost all of these examples, the properties are sort of well known from previous courses that you've probably taken,
like, for instance, working with functions, it's very clear from the properties of functions that you already know and maybe even
approving as a part of this class or previous classes that the axioms would hold.
But you'd want to go through them for yourself to make sure you're convinced that they do hold and work the way that you think they do.
On the other hand,
on your problems that I give you a vector space where I don't think it's super clear that that that object would actually be a vector space,
so then you would need to go through and check all the 10 axioms and verify for yourself, like what really is the zero vector here?
What's going on there? Not long arguments, but you need to go through and think about what's happening.
So at least once in your life, you should check some things of vector space.
You don't want to do it many times in your life because there are ten things to check. But at least once, at least once, you need to do it.
Yes. What?
Which one that is not a vector space.
Yeah, OK, so if this were a vector space,
there would need to be some element in my vector space that I could put here some X Y so that
I would get the same vector that I plugged in so that this would have to be equal to AB.
But the definition that I have for what this does says that this would take the ad,
the first two components and just put a zero in the second component. Like you might have a very good reason for defining that operation,
but there is then no vector that I could plug in here for X and Y that would result in give it back the same AB here,
because B always gets sent to zero no matter what you chose for X and Y, so there's no zero vector with this operation.
So that makes sense. Great. Yes.
The. They're just sets for us, like those are it would depend on specific examples,
what properties they might have and they might have reasonable properties for you to study for the application you might have in mind,
but they don't fall under this big category of vector spaces. So the theory we're developing here won't apply.
Great question. OK, so we are starting to get a library.
Yes. So if one was in the set of all real numbers, but then when I add two of them together,
then I get something that doesn't have a one in the second component. Right.
So if I add to it, because this is what the usual operations, right, and that one, so if I add like a one plus B one,
then I'm going to get A plus B two, which is not one of the same form because it's not a one in that second component.
So it's not closed. Does it make sense? Great.
Yes. Instead of what?
Yes, certainly there is a way of doing a formal proof,
so an example of an axiom failing is a formal proof that the thing you're studying is not a vector space because these are all for all quantifiers.
So then showing that something doesn't work, you just need a single instance of it.
Failing to show something is a vector space. Then you do need a formal proof of each of the 10 axioms.
So I have certainly not written that out in these cases,
but these properties are certainly properties that we've seen before in the case of say and by and matrices like that
was one of the properties we observed in the properties of Matrix Edition and the properties of scalar multiplication.
So we've certainly seen these. The follow up.
Yeah, so for if you want to prove that the space of, say, the set of NBN matrices is a vector space, then you would need to go through each one.
I'd show how if I take an NBN matrix A and an NBN matrix B, then when I add them together, I get a matrix A plus B that's still in and by NT Matrix.
And that would check the first axiom. So you would write each of these out. So in that case, it would just be like, I mean, should we do one quickly?
So, for instance, here will prove axiom one for me to buy two.
So let a be equal to A, B, C, D, and B will be equal to E, f, g, h.
Well then by definition A plus B is equal to A plus E, B plus F, C plus G and D plus H, which is again an element in the space of two.
But you make the set of two by two matrices.
So then I've just proven that's an explicit proof that for two by two matrices it's closed under that Matrix edition.
But you do that, you could do that for all of them. Most cases it follows from properties we've already seen.
So like you can also cite from the first day of Matrix operations, we observed this.
Does that answer your question? All right. So the goal now is to keep building this library over the next few years.
But we also want to understand the structure of a vector space. So it helps when you're studying the structure.
Something to think about. What are the pieces that you could have? Right.
So we want to understand the structure of a vector space. So one way that we could try to understand the structure of vector space is we
could look for smaller pieces of that thing that behave like a vector space.
These are things we're going to call subspace. So definition.
A subspace. Of a vector space V.
Is a subset. Question, is there a question?
I'm happy to answer if there is one. I'll get a new piece of chalk while people can think their questions.
Other anything. Have a nice dramatic pause.
A subspace of a vector space V is a subset, first of all.
H a v such that the following conditions hold one, I want the zero vector V to be an element in this space, this subset.
So I want it to contain the zero vector.
And two, I'd like to if I take some things inside my subset and I add them together, I want to still be in that subset so it behaves that it's closed.
So if you and we are in age, then I want you plus me to be an age.
So this is closed under Ed. Under addition.
Similarly, I want to be scaled, closed under scalar multiplication three, so if.
The. And. You is an element in my set age, then I want see times you to be an element in age.
So this is what we're going to call closed under scalar multiplication. Yes.
Oh, that's a great point from these two properties or these three properties, we then get that it will be a vector space.
So that is indeed true. So some spaces are themselves vector spaces.
So that's a great remark. So first thing to note, an observation or a mark.
H subspace h is itself a vector space.
It is also a vector space.
OK, so what's what's the biggest subspace you could think of?
The vector space itself solves a subset of V V definitely contains the zero vector, and V it's closed because it's a vector space.
So the second two axioms hold. So the second remark is V is a subspace of the it's the largest possible subspace you can have.
OK, on the other side of that coin, what do you think is the smallest subspace you could have, Markoe?
You're right. Great. So if I just had this small set consisting of just the zero vector, this is also a subspace if the smallest possible subspace.
So let's just think about this for a second. So if I have the zero vector in here, well, that means the zero vector is definitely in that set.
If I took two elements in this set, well, they both would have to be the zero vector.
If I add the zero vector to the zero vector, I just get the zero vector again.
That was one of your vector space axioms. So then, you know, look, you're on that side again.
The same thing is true here. If you scale the zero vector by any real number, you just get back to zero vector.
And so then you would get that. It's closed under vector addition as well, Jonathan.
Well, it's going to be in this vector space V so we can use the vector space axioms to actually verify that.
So the vector space axioms actually give us quite a lot to work with, including things like distributive and additive inverses.
So you can I mean, that would be something that we could certainly check by using those properties.
But when we're working in a vector space, we have those 10 axioms that we can work with to in order to verify things.
So we can certainly use those to our advantage.
I have this one trick question on there on the handout, the next question on my handout is are to a subspace of our three.
No, why not? Yeah, zero zero, for instance, is not an element in our three, so it's not even a subset.
So I just want to be really emphatic about that. Are two is not a subspace of our three.
You can certainly find things inside of our three that look like our two, like the XY plane in our three.
But that is not the same thing as our two. Yes.
From the definition of subspace does work follow. So you listed what you want to be there and what he belongs to doesn't want to be that.
We we would have to assume it from being a vector space.
No one says that has to be. Well, the problem is that if we don't have one, each could be empty and then we couldn't do it.
So we need one to make sure that it's not empty and it's sort of a convenient thing to insist that it has.
But you're right that if we had three and we knew it was not empty, then we could prove something about the zero vector.
I was thinking, like with the. Right.
Example what sorry, it sounds like you resolved your own question,
so I think I was helpful and just being a sounding board for you, but I didn't quite understand what the question was.
I'm sorry. Sometimes that's the the help that people need is just to have someone listen.
So. Yes, I think that is also back up.
I did find a three zero and the fact that you didn't feel that existed back then, you thing that you think of the.
So you mean why how do we prove that we have an additive inverse, so, well, let's think about this.
So how would we prove that we have additive inverses from this?
So we know that if I add together anything, I'm going to result to be back in my space.
Right. So could we use that somehow to get the existence of additive inverses?
So we have that we have zero in here, so we can definitely play around with zero,
but then you could try to think about how you might get the something that
would add to zero coming out of that and then use that to define your inverse.
OK. Yes.
So that's a good point, too. So the idea is then you have you can scale by any real number here.
So then you could, for instance, scale by negative one and think about what properties that would have to have.
So scaling by negative one, that would also then you have the usual properties of being inside of that you could use to get out
what that might be and then take one of those to be you or be here and prove what it would have to be.
So there is a little bit of work to do there, but those are, I think, reasonable exercises to work through to try it out.
I want to do one example of proving something is a subspace here.
Let's see, do I have enough time to do it? I have three minutes or two minutes.
I have two minutes. I'm sorry, I shouldn't exaggerate. So probably I think what makes the most sense for me to do is rush through this last example.
You have nearly everything you need. Adam, set it last quick.
It was sub spaces, so I think what I'll do is I'll end, what, like a minute earlier or something on a Friday.
And so enjoy your extra minute. All right.
Have a good weekend. Just treat it like a subspace to be infinite to zero.
