Let's let's go ahead and get started. So in terms of some announcements, so we're getting close to the end of the semester.
There's not that much more time left, so I just wanted to kind of outline what's remaining for us.
So there's one more quiz. There's three more problem sets and there's the final project.
So it's really we're getting close to the end here.
The bulk of the time that you put towards this class, I would encourage you to put towards your final project from basically now until it's due.
The problem sets are going to correspondingly get shorter to allow for you to have that time.
OK, it's not that the course is going to suddenly have a lot more time allocated to it.
In particular, I wanted to outline when the problem sets will be due.
So problems at 10. The one with their project proposal is due this Friday problems that 11 will then be due a week
from Friday and then the last problems that problems at 12 will be do the last day of class.
December 1st. OK, so. Just to kind of keep in mind what's coming.
There won't be quite as much proof of work to do on these problem sets, especially problems at 12.
This is then our problems that that's more focused on data analysis for the quantitative reasoning with data requirement.
So instead of poufy problems, there will be a few a handful of problems that require you to do some data analysis.
Using the tools will develop over the next few weeks. So that's that's what's coming.
OK. Just in terms of how to allocate your time and energy around this class,
it'll be a much more pleasant experience if you put in sort of small amounts of consistent work into your project rather than trying to,
like do everything the night before things or do. So the first big check in will be this Friday.
When you turn in your proposal again, this not you shouldn't feel a tremendous amount of pressure there.
We're just trying to encourage you to get started.
And so I encourage you to write your proposal in a way to maximize the quality of the feedback that you're getting.
So if there's something that you're worried about for your project, pose it as a question as a part of your project proposal,
saying, like, we're not really sure what we would prove as a part of this project.
We're having trouble finding a source that's written at a level we can really digest.
It's better to be upfront with your concerns early in the process,
rather than like coming to me on December 12th and being like, I can't really find a source to read.
Like, that's not the time. The next major check in point will be when you submit a draft, and that will be the last day of the semester.
So that will be December 1st. So when we the Wednesday, when we get back from Thanksgiving break, so that's when the more complete that draft is,
the more likely that you will have a get good feedback on the draft to know that
it's sort of going in the direction that we will evaluate highly with the proposal.
You'll be matched with ATF that will be sort of the person mentoring your project,
so the person you should feel free to reach out to with questions that will either be me or one of the four t.f grad students for the class.
So once you turn in that project proposal, then it's going to generate a bunch of peer review requests.
So you'll all do.
I think two peer reviews, you'll read some other people's projects and get some idea of like some really cool ideas other people are doing,
and that might give you ideas for your own project that is a part of your final project grade,
as well as giving quality, high quality feedback to your classmates.
OK. That'll happen on December 1st, then December 1st, the ones we're reading period starts December 2nd through about a week later.
You'll be asked to meet with the t.f that's reading your project to get more feedback, more direct direction of how to finish this thing.
OK, until it's do, the final project will be then be due December 13th.
So if you're thinking about like what the weather, what you're doing is appropriate for your project.
I mean, there are a lot of points to get feedback. Don't wait until the last minute for that to happen.
The project scores tend to be pretty high because people put in a lot of work, but I'll just throw out the warning that is not uniformly the case, OK?
The ones that usually score poorly are the ones that people start working on them the weekend before they're due.
And that usually is a recipe for disaster. So don't do that.
Consistent work regularly until the project comes will make this much less stressful.
But you should know that I'm happy to be a resource with projects along with all the seniors are happy to be resources.
I mean, go to office hours, ask questions. Even at this early stage, ask the seniors what they did.
The ones that took about 20 to what they did for their projects that will give you, I think, a lot of great ideas.
They've also seen a lot of the projects through the peer review process last year to.
So I just want to make sure we're all clear on what's happening. Tommy. I was thinking that piece at 11 would probably be posted a little bit later,
just because we still have piece that tend to on Friday and we switched to or be doing on due next Friday.
So I don't know if it'll be posted today. Maybe tomorrow it'll be posted.
Yeah, look. So you can every group member has to submit something on great scope.
You don't have to submit different proposals. This is just because of a quirk on great scope.
It's hard for us to group them together,
and it creates an administrative headache for us to like click through to find like, who actually submitted this thing.
So it's really very helpful for us if every group member just submits the proposal.
And then when you're working together, you probably want to look at each other's grade scope submission to see,
like what comments you actually got from your t.f reader.
Yeah. Just the final, I mean, I think the earlier you start talking things, the better.
But I mean, I'm not going to like. I want there will be no points taken off if the proposal is written in some other form.
I mean, the proposal might be more of an outline form anyway, so it's not as important that it's tacked.
Yeah. Oh, yeah, it's one of several people emailed me about that, I'm sorry, I'll do that.
I teach right after this. As soon as I get back to my office, I'll do that. Yeah, sorry about that.
Tommy, go. Yep, that's after all.
So you won't do peer reviews on the proposals, you'll only do peer reviews on the drafts, so that will be December 1st.
So after the last day of the semester, then you'll get a canvas invitation to read two of your classmates projects.
It's on the syllabus, I don't remember off the top of my head, I think you have like four or five days to do that.
And to be honest, like that should not take very long.
I mean, it's really about like you reading and giving your thoughts like it's an important piece of feedback to say, I was super confused.
That's good for your classmates to know because you are the intended audience, so they should be adapting what they're presenting to the math.
Twenty two audience. OK, so I'm happy to.
As more questions sort of occur to you with the projects, I mean, I'm sure as you dove more into it,
you'll get more things you're curious about, but I'm happy to answer those questions as they come up.
So really, what the last bit of this course is about?
In some sense, we've covered the core of the material.
What we're doing now is what I view as kind of the capstone of this course.
We're going to kind of see some different directions. You can push the material in and also set the stage for a multivariable calculus course.
So thinking about either 20 to be or maybe a different calculus course, but hopefully 20 to be so,
but so thinking about building that geometric understanding of what we're doing so that we are prepared to do calculus.
So today, what I wanted to do is present one application of the things we've been doing.
So the starting point for this will be picking up with your second semester calculus class, either math one,
be here at Harvard or BSC Calculus, if you took that in high school or whatever experience you had with integral calculus.
So one of the main topics there is a little bit with differential equations.
So I wanted to present one application of what we've been doing to that kind of problem.
So let's just start with a classical problem in physics. So this is the situation of a simple harmonic oscillator.
Someone gets up to leave. Last year, when I did this lesson, I said the word simple harmonic oscillator and there was an audible groan from the class.
So it's already an improvement over last year. That's why I was pausing to wait to see if that was going to happen again.
So we have this mass on a spring, and the idea is we're modeling this in a frictionless way, at least to start with.
We'll consider this. Our displacement from this equilibrium position to be X equals zero.
And then we measure sort of positive displacement and negative displacement away from that equilibrium.
So if we just take the mass in the spring, it's placed at the equilibrium. Of course, it's not going to move.
You pull your mass, you let it go. It's going to start oscillating around that equilibrium position.
OK. You could also think about and then the way that you derive the equation governing this, you use Hooke's law in physics.
So you think about the spring constant.
I'm just going to choose my spring constant to be one in my mass, to be one to make things sort of clear or easy, rather.
So what's going to happen then, is we get the differential equation of X double prime of T is then equal to well,
you get pushed back to the equilibrium. So negative x of T.
So if you have some positive displacement, then we're being pushed back towards that equilibrium position.
Jonathan, I don't recall this and I don't recall what we haven't done anything yet.
There's nothing to recall yet. No, I don't recall it.
We're going forward in the course of how or will it be to recall things like this?
Recall things like what the latest harmonic oscillators were also different from the way.
Well, Jonathan, you have to give me a chance to say something before you object to everything.
So I guess I'm asking that you believe me if you don't want to think about physics at all or you've never taken a physics class,
I'm just asking that you believe me that the derivation of a simple harmonic oscillator will come from this particular differential equation.
So I don't particularly need you to remind. Remember that the derivation of Hooke's law,
it should feel somewhat intuitive that the idea that like my the acceleration I'm
going to feel will be the negative of the displacement I have from the equilibrium.
So, I mean, this is what I'm asking for your trust in the intuition behind how you would derive the behavior of a mass and a spring.
Do I particularly care about the behavior of a mass on a spring? Of course not.
The reason why you care about the behavior of a mass on a spring is because it's a representation of a lot of different types of problems,
whether it's inside of thinking inside of an atom,
or if you're thinking about something like that, a door like you want to close the door and have it not slam,
you're then modeling then a mass on a spring inside of that door. So like in terms of engineering applications, this idea comes up.
So I'm just presenting a place where this could appear.
I'm not asking that you have a precise knowledge of everything that happens in a physics course.
So the main point for us is this that you have as a starting point, a particular differential equation.
If you've never seen a differential equation before, it's just an equation involving derivatives.
OK. The main place that you've seen? Well, I claim everyone in here has seen differential equations before, even whether you've acknowledged that.
I mean, think back to like even your first semester of calculus, you think about exponential functions.
Well, that's just saying the rate of change is proportional to how much you have.
And that seems reasonable to model lots of things where when you have lots of something that it might be growing at a more or faster rate.
So we then use that x prime as equal to K times x to represent that kind of a situation.
This is, of course, not a full class in mathematical modeling to go into that particular direction.
And just trying to present a situation that might gather some nods of agreement from the class, but not necessarily always.
So if you don't particularly remember how you derive this differential equation, I'm happy to go through a physical derivation in, say, office hours.
If you don't care to see a physical derivation,
then I would just say the starting point is I want to find some function whose second derivative is equal to negative of the original function.
That's what it means to solve the differential equation. So you can certainly take it as a pure math problem.
So what we want to do. Because we want to find some function that satisfies this equation.
That's all we're doing when we solve a differential equation. OK.
Now I have to regain my train of thought. What are we actually doing here?
So if you think back to at least math one b at Harvard, the way that we approach solving a differential equation of this form is you make
and the way you often approach just in a general differential equations class.
Trying to solve a differential equation is you make an informed guess about what the solution might be and you try to find a solution of that form.
So I'm computing some derivatives,
so I would think that it might be convenient for me to work with some functions that are easy to compute the derivatives up.
So what you often do, or one possible approach is you could guess a particular solution.
So I'm going to guess an exponential solution to the RTI.
So then what that would mean is I want to know, is there some constant ah, that would make this a solution to the differential equation?
Well, to check that you would just plug it in. So I look at, well, what's acceptable prime.
So then that's going to be r squared e to the R t x of T is, of course, e to the R T.
So then that means X of T is a solution to x double prime plus X is equal to zero if and only if, if I when I plug this thing in, I would get zero.
So I have our squared e to the R T plus e t r t is equal to zero.
Now you factor, so I have our squared plus one b t r t is equal to zero.
So I need the product of two things to be equal to zero.
So either this is zero or this is zero, the exponential function is never zero.
So then that tells me that I have our squared r squared plus one is equal to zero.
So that tells me the zeros for this will be ours equal to plus or minus I.
The imaginary unit. So furthermore, that tells me that, say, X of T.
Well, maybe I'll call this x one being equal to any constant, say C one e to the I T plus c to D to the minus T.
Will be a solution. We all worked this out on two steps.
So in particular, that means the X1 of T is equal to e to the I t is a solution.
And X two of T is equal to the minus T is a solution.
So we found two solutions. The other thing you might notice is that if I scaled this solution by any real number, it's still a solution.
It still satisfies that differential equation. If I scale this solution, I would then get another solution.
If I add them, I get another solution. So in particular, if I take any linear combinations of these two, I get a solution.
So then we call that the general solution of T is equal to see one e to the I t, I'll see to it the minus.
I mean, this is the general solution. So in fact, all solutions to this differential equation will be of this form for some constant C one and C two.
The thing that's a little bit disappointing about this form is that it involves a lot of complex numbers.
And while I think complex numbers are fun to work with,
it seems a little bit strange that it involves complex numbers because we're talking about a mass on a spring.
So if you're thinking about what this is supposed to represent,
especially given that I might model this without any sort of friction that you would expect that this should just oscillate back and forth forever.
So I don't see anything there that really looks like oscillation. And what does it mean to be a complex number in that context?
That seems kind of strange in particular, given the physical scenario that I'm trying to Model X of T should be modeled by a real number.
So what that means is that C one and C two will then have to be complex numbers
that will cancel out so that you end up with a real number at the end of the day.
So you're working with a lot of complex numbers in order to model something that's real, which should feel kind of strange.
It does often happen in physics, especially when you're thinking about oscillatory things,
when you're doing waves, but it still should legitimately feel kind of strange.
So this is the general form we often call this the complex form of the solution because it's involving lots of complex numbers.
But we could also try to make this the real form of this expression.
So another thing that you learn here, at least in math one B and presumably in B.C. calculus is the Oilers formula.
So if you we we think about E to the city and we can express that as a point in the complex plane,
and it's telling us just about rotation by an angle of T from the positive x axis.
So you could then also express that as cosine in terms of cosine and sine so recall.
Euler's formula. Boilers.
Formula. So geometrically so we have a complex plane.
We make an angle of T from one, and this point can be thought of in two ways it is e to the I t, but it's also cosine t plus i sign T.
Which gives us this rather remarkable way of thinking about complex numbers to that when we think about multiplying by a complex number,
that it's representing rotation. So it's sort of a nice interpretation to have.
So if we use that in this form, we can plug in for E to the T here,
cosine t plus I signed T and we can plug in for here cosine negative tea and plus
I sign negative tea and then use our trig formulas to simplify those expressions.
And we can group things together to get an expression that only involves signs and co signs,
which hopefully also then feels more oscillatory than what we had before.
So now plugging in. To the complex form.
And we get the following, and we will spend more time driving this formula at the end of class using linear algebra.
So if it's not entirely clear how to see it yet? Don't worry.
So these will be different coefficients, a d one and D two, but now involving sine and cosine cosine de plus de to two.
So this is called the real form of your solutions. So these are different coefficients D1 and D2.
Again, I'll show how to go from this form to that form using linear algebra at the end.
But you can also see it by just plugging in with formula. So this is this is what I would tell my one B students to recall.
It's OK again, if you have not seen that before. It's just some context to think about.
And I think it's more of a place for food, for thought in terms of for your question, Jonathan.
I think a lot of the topics we think about towards the end of the semester are more
like to try to think about what comes next rather than necessarily just to focus on.
Exactly the details. OK, so we have this situation where remodeling a mass on a spring.
Let's think about it from another approach. So this is what could have come from my one big lesson.
Well, let's think about it from another point of view that's maybe more relevant to us.
So again, our starting point is just this differential equation,
so that can be totally entirely or context for this problem is it's just some differential equation you want to study.
So double prime plus acts of T is supposed to be equal to zero.
So you're saying you want some function x that satisfies this differential equations?
Well, another approach could be and this is actually a common approach, if you took a class like, Hey,
I'm one of five, a differential equations course is that you can introduce another variable here.
So I'm going to give a name to the first derivative of this function, which you might think of then, is the velocity.
So let's define V to be equal to x prime.
So I'm just naming the velocity. Well, now we could re express my differential equation here.
And a little bit of a different way. So I have V is equal to x prime.
So and then if I plug that into here and I express that in terms of V.
Well, this is then v prime plus x is equal to zero.
So I have then say the prime is equal to minus X and I have X prime is equal to V.
So instead of studying what we call a second order differential equation, it's called second order because it uses two derivatives.
It's also called constant coefficient.
These are the best kind of differential equations because they're nicely solvable, because all the coefficients are just constant numbers.
They're not functions, which makes things a little bit harder.
So here we've now turned this second order constant coefficient differential equation into two first order differential equations.
We now have a system of differential equations, which is sort of exciting for us because we've been working with systems of equations all semester,
so we can then transform this into a matrix equation. OK, so I'm going to express this idea as a matrix equation.
To then try to use linear algebra in order to understand what's going on.
So I'm going to write this as V and X, so I'm differentiating each of those two things.
So it's the derivative of that vector. Those are both functions of T.
Then on the other side of the equation. I want to multiply by some matrix.
Times the Vector X and V. So what Matrix could I put there to express the right hand side of these two equations?
Jonathan? What?
Negative ones have been we're not negative one. Here, so then I'm getting oh, I switched them, I'm going to change your answer, I'm sorry,
v and X, your answer was correct with what I'd written, but can now what I mean?
So thank you. There, I want to be consistent.
It's V and X and V and X over here. Otherwise, it's kind of a strange convention.
So the nice thing that's showing up now is that we're getting the form derivative is equal to matrix times your vector.
So this gives us a different way of expressing the exact same type of differential equation.
So now we could then take say we interpret this as like why the vector prime is equal to a the two by two matrix times vector.
Why? So now what we want to do is we want to solve differential equations of this form.
So you want to solve systems of First Order differential equations. So the goal?
To solve. Systems. First order equations.
Differential equations. So, namely, equations of the form vector, why prime is equal to matrix times Vector Y.
So we'll see two methods for solving differential equations of this form.
Many, many, many applications come down to solving applications, solving rather differential equations of this form systems of differential equations.
So if you're studying like environmental science, lots of your models will be coming up.
By thinking about like modeling pollution spread or modeling like flow, and they'll be going from one puddle to another,
where before you're thinking about biology, you want a model like an injection of something into your body.
You then have like different components representing different regions of your body.
There's like the bloodstream, there's the muscle inside the muscles and then the you measure the movement between those different regions.
And these kinds of models show up from these differential equations. So that's what we want to do.
We want to solve differential equations of this form. So what I want to do the way that I'm going to solve it,
and this is actually a common approach to solve many types of differential equations, not just the ones here is.
I'm going to go back to the way that we approached it in the first context.
So the way that we did it here is we tried to guess a solution of a nice form where we could then just figure out what it would be.
I'm going to try to guess a solution here, too. Why not?
It's just the derivative is equal to some constant, some matrix times the vector.
So it seems like it's kind of vaguely exponential.
Like, in fact, this is often the point of what's called the matrix exponential, and we can form an exponential matrix to solve this as well.
But so what we're going to do is we're going to try to guess a nice form for the solution.
So just like we did above, where I guess the form e to the T, I'm now going to guess the form that at some vector v times an exponential.
So let's guess that you have a solution of the form Y of T, so vector y is equal to some vector v times and exponential.
So where? V, I'm just going to make everything in our to some vector and two and lambda is some real number.
So this is a scalar and this is a vector. So just like I did before, if you're going to guess the form of a differential equation,
you would now plug it into your differential equation and see what conditions that gives you.
So I'm going to plug it into this thing and see what happens. So if I compute, why prime?
Of T. Well, that means I'm differentiating this thing. Well, we use a vector.
It's not a function. It doesn't depend on T at all. So it's just like a scalar.
So the only part that involves a T is right here. So this is then going to be equal to v times.
Lambda comes down e to the lambda T. So that's what the derivative of that particular gas is.
The other side of the equation is a times we are eight times y rather a times y of T,
so then that's just going to be equal to a times vector v times the scalar e to the lambda T.
So that means that I have a solution if and only if those two things are equal.
So let's think about what that means. So hence. Oops!
Pants. Why of T is equal to the E to the lamb, the T is a solution to the equation.
Y prime of T is equal to eight times y of T if and only if.
When I plug it in, so I would get lambda v e to the lambda T is equal to a times v e lambda t.
I need these two things to be equal. Yes, Tommy.
Well. Oh, no, no, no, Vector V is just some vector, it's constant, it's a constant, it's just some Vector V here.
I'm not saying that's like my velocity vector from before. That was a particular example for the example of the the, uh, the harmonic oscillator.
Yes. Sure. What is this, what is called an.
It's called what? Oh, yes, this is an onsite solution.
This is called an onslaughts. And. So in general, all of them are very exhausting.
So we can do this technique for reduction of order.
That's what we were doing here to introduce an auxiliary value variable to turn it into a system of first order equations.
There is a context in which we can do that. This won't always work.
Not all equations can be turned into this form. I mean, many equations might have your coefficients depending on time as well.
Like, for instance, a one way that you might be modeling a mass in a spring as like a car tire.
Right? You want to design the suspension system for a car? Well, I mean,
it's one way that you might try to mitigate the impact of the bouncing of the
car is to introduce a force to compensate for the the ground impacting the car,
so you can then try to cancel that out. So that would be then having some other thing coming in to balance it.
But here we can. So if you can turn your differential equation into this particular form, then we can form this gas of a solution of this form.
And we'd like to know what would have to be true for that to be a solution. Yeah.
James. That's a good question.
So because you might wonder, like, have we really found everything right?
Well, the thing that it sort of happens like in the same way when we talk about when we're working inside of a vector space,
like when we talk about finding a basis for a vector space, have we really found everything?
So you can take the span of the solutions you've found so far and then say, Well, how much of I found in the case of a linear differential equation,
one of this form the most number that you could find will correspond to the size of your matrix,
so you could find out most too linearly independent solutions here.
So once I've found to, I know to stop looking because it's a two by two matrix.
If it were an end by end matrix, then I would know there could be end linearly independent things, so I would look for any of them.
And that's that's specific to the situation where, because of the form of my differential equation,
if I take any linear combination of solutions, I get another solution. So then we're saying we're working with some subspace of solutions.
Senator, your question? Yes. There.
Here I am plugging in, right? I'm plugging this thing in.
So I just have a times that thing. Yep. So I'm just I'm I'm just doing what the Matrix tells me to do.
We plug it in and see what happens. So I need them to be equal. So that's what I have over here.
So now I can just move it over, say to the other side of the equation. So I have then zero is equal to a V,
and then I just have this scalar e to the lambda T. And I've moved this thing over to the other side of the equation.
So it becomes lambda b times e lambda T.
So remember e to the lambda T is just outputting a real number, so I can certainly just factor that out.
So then I have zero is equal to. A V minus lambda v.
Times E slammed a tweet. So now you want the product of these things to be equal to zero.
This is the zero vector, of course. So then this thing will never output zero.
So I know this thing has to be equal to zero. So then I have zero is equal to a V minus lambda v.
And then rearranging that equation then gives me a times v as equal to lambda times b.
So if I wanted this to be a solution.
What would you tell me about Lambda and V, what has to be true about these specific, the specific vector and the specific scalar?
Xavier. Yeah, I.
That's right. So then that means that we. Yes.
And again, Vector. And.
Lambda is an eigenvalue.
So if it's a two by two matrix, we know we can find out most too linearly independent eigenvectors, so we'll call them V-1 and V-2.
We have the corresponding eigenvalues lambda one and lambda two.
And then we can write down. Then the corresponding general solution to my differential equation y of T will be equal to see one.
Times v one e two. The Lambda one T plus c two v two times e the lambda two.
So just like I did before, any linear combination of these will also be a solution.
So I can describe the solution space by taking the span of those two solutions that I found because
I've now shown that each of those solutions corresponds to an eigen vector for that matrix.
I think this goes back to James question as well of how do we know that we found all of them?
Well, there can't be more than two linearly independent eigenvectors for two by two matrix.
Similarly, there can't be more than n linearly independent eigenvectors front end by end matrix.
Yeah, look. Mm-Hmm.
Well. How would we check that if we weren't convinced of it?
So like it's the case oftentimes where you're just not going to be sure of something like, I don't see why that's true.
How would you verify that it's true?
You just yeah, you just plug it in and verify that a linear combination of two solutions will give you another solution.
So like, you could compute the derivative twice and make sure that it does come out indeed to be negative of the original thing.
Tommy, you have. We can definitely have complex eigenvalues, yep.
I mean. Lambda, you're right, I should say lambda can be in C, too.
You're right, you're right. You're right, you're right. I'll make.
So they could be complex. Sure. Because, in fact, in the case of the harmonic oscillator, there will be complex.
We don't do very much in this class with complex eigenvalues. So I'm just trying to hint at what can happen.
Not we're not going to necessarily go through every last thing.
Yeah. What if is zero?
So certainly, you can't have your eigenvectors be equal to zero. What?
So we want B not to be zero, is what you're saying. So, yeah, we want a non-zero solution to this.
So because I mean, that's a fair point. So why do we what happens if B is equal to zero here?
What will happen? Well, if we go back to our differential equation, the derivative of zero is zero eight zero zero.
So sure, it's a solution. So it's sort of like saying whenever we look at a subspace, we always contain the zero vector.
So yes, we will have the zero solution to this thing. We're looking for the non-zero solutions.
So maybe non-zero. Savior.
In the wind, a combination of I was. If not, you will not necessarily also be.
But I'm not. Good question, I'm not asking for them to be an agent vector.
I'm just asking them for them to satisfy this relationship. So because the derivative here is going to be linear.
Operator Right. We know the derivative is a linear transformation.
If I take a linear combination of two things that satisfies this equation, the result will still satisfy the equation.
And again, to I think, Luke's question, we can literally plug in this expression for my general solution.
That's always a way to check if you have a solution to a differential equation, right?
Just like if you want to check whether you have an anti derivative, what do you do?
Well, you just differentiate it and see if it's what you wanted. Yes.
Do you mean the specific factors here? Read more.
Right. Yeah, we can think about that as a vector space.
So then you're taking an input function and you're out putting a function,
so then you're thinking about solving working on a particular function space.
You do often take that perspective and say quantum mechanics and physics when you're solving, when you have a differential operator in front of you.
That you need to solve. So then you're thinking about solving that on a particular function space so that
that context does come up and that what you do in that context as you compute a
bunch of eigenvalues and eigen functions eigenvectors and then you use that basis to
solve the differential equation in that context with respect to that nice basis. Yeah.
This does work for constant coefficient differential equations of higher order using kind of a
similar trick to the one I did there to turn it into a system of First Order differential equations.
So that kind of a technique does come up a lot. I'll point out,
there are a lot of different ways you would approach studying differential
equations depending on the type of differential equation you have in front of you.
Sort of the nicest ones you often encounter and the ones we work with the most in engineering and physics are the constant coefficient ones.
And the reason for that is mostly because they're nice to solve.
It's not necessarily because, like they encapsulate like the full difficulty of the problem we might be studying.
So they make them sort of a nice approximation. I mean, this comes up throughout the engineering and physics literature.
When you want to then study something, you're like, Well, turn it into a simple, simple harmonic oscillator and model it that way.
But you might want a more sophisticated differential equation.
The problem then becomes like it might be hard to solve when you have a situation like that,
like we have difficult differential equations, you often then use numerical methods to solve those differential equations.
So use a computer simulations. OK, so that's a little bit of a theory.
Let's do an example. Well, the race.
Race the earlier stuff. So again, in terms of a linear algebra problem,
you can just take this to be your starting point is you want to find why such that y prime is equal to eight times y,
so you want to find a solution to this differential equation. So let's consider a particular example.
Let's take. The following differential equation.
So let's take why Prime is equal to one to three to four times, why do you?
So your derivatives will be this kind of linear combination of your.
Function. And I'd like to know what functions do that.
Well, our strategy now is you find eigenvalues and eigenvectors of your associated matrix.
So here we have a two by two matrix so we can find the associated eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
So the eigenvalues. Well, then you compute the zeros of the characteristic polynomial.
So the characteristic polynomial in this case comes out to be lambda minus four times lambda plus one.
So the two eigenvalues will be four and minus one.
They're distinct. So you already know what's going to be diagonal sizable.
Because you can just take an eigenvectors corresponding to four and eigenvectors
corresponding to minus one and then find Um and then take the use that I analyzation theory.
So we know how to compute eigen spaces so we can compute the EIGEN space corresponding to four.
This comes out to be the span of the vector two three.
And we know how to compute the iron space corresponding to the eigenvalue of negative one.
This corresponds to negative one one. So then what the previous observation tells us is that the general solution to the system
should then be why T is equal to some constant C one times this first basis factor to three.
Eat the 40 plus see two times E to the minus 80 percent in my back door minus one one.
So any solution to this particular differential equation will be of this form.
So we can then write down all of them, C one and C two might be coming from some initial measurements that you've made for your system,
like maybe, you know, the initial position or the initial velocity of what you're studying.
So then you can use to that to solve for C one and C two. So if you think about what this does, though, like for a fixed C one and C two,
this will trace out some region in the plane ride, some outputting for each time a vector and R two.
So it's giving you some kind of a solution trajectory inside of the plane so we can think
about a geometric perspective on this by plotting those points for a geometric perspective.
This is to connect back to say one B, for instance, this is called the phase portrait.
So what we're going to do is we're just going to plot some of these for particular values of C one and C two.
So let's do that. So, you know what, I want to move to a different board.
One of them, well, I guess I can do what I could do some work over here. I'll do this work over here.
So let's let's start kind of slowly here.
So let's take some simple values of C one and C two.
So suppose I take C one is equal to, I don't know, one and C two is equal to zero, then the corresponding solution y of T.
Well, it'll be two three times e to the 14.
So if I plotted that in the plane, what would that look like?
So I applaud that for different values of tea. So in T equals zero, it's the point to three.
All right, so I go over a one to one to three, so it's up here.
It's right there, if I plug in T is equal to two.
What will that point look like? For plug in T is equal to three.
He's equal to for what's going to happen when you plot all these points.
Several people are just. Which is a correct gesture.
So it's just this vector two three scale by something the T value is scaling by larger and larger real numbers,
so it's going to continue in that direction and just keep going. So it's going to be in the eigen space corresponding to the eigenvalue of four.
And it will just march off to infinity. So in this case.
We have the eigen space here,
here is the eigen space corresponding the eigenvalue for this particular solution then goes outwards as T goes to infinity.
Well, you could think about what about if I took say, sea was equal to negative one?
What would happen that? So what if I took C one with a negative one C to is equal to zero?
Well, then I have a solution y of T is equal to negative two three d to the forty.
What happens here? So again, I see some people answering with gestures.
Now it's going the opposite way, but still in that same island space.
So it's not going this way. So in one case, you're going off to infinity along the eigen space for two and sort of the first quadrant.
The other case, you're going down. So all I'm doing here is I'm plugging in different values of tea and I'm plotting the outputs.
So it gives me these trajectories in the face space. OK, well, now let's think about what would happen if instead I made sea one equal to zero.
And I looked at coefficients of sea to. So where should I do that?
We're here. Should use a different color.
So now I'm going to take C one is you can you see this color?
No, that's not. Use it then. I can barely see it right in front of my face.
How about that you could see this one, right? It's an awkward angle for you, Jonathan, can you still see it?
Yeah, you can. That said, the name for the past and for the past, how long?
Trying to write a. Hmm.
I'm not sure what to do with that. I could go back 15 minutes.
Well. So.
I think the shortest summary I can give of what we've been doing is that we want to find some functions that satisfy some properties.
If you go back to the simplest thing that you've done back in calc one, when you've learned about exponential functions,
you're looking for functions that, when you differentiate them, are equal to k times the original function.
So then you know that you're looking for functions of the form. E is your function is equal to C e to the Katie, for instance.
And that's the first situation where you think about differential equations.
You might also think about the differential equations when you think about like you have a constant rate of change.
So then you know, you're modeling a linear function in calc one, your solution will be of the form Y equals m x plus b.
All we're doing here is we're doing the same thing for linear functions of in variables.
So when we think about what's going on here, I'm saying why prime,
the derivative of some vector of functions will be equal to a matrix times your original vector.
So you should contrast that, I mean, when you're trying to make sense of a new mathematical context and you think about a new application,
think about the simplest instance of this you can. The simplest instance of this question would be a one by one matrix.
So if you go back to a one by one matrix,
then you have one component function why you have one component function here and you have a one by one matrix.
So you have the situation. Why prime of T is equal to this one by one matrix K and Y of T.
So you want some function that when I differentiate, it is just k times the original function.
So we know a function that does that from the differentiation rules we learned in calc one to say that this will be why of T.
Well, that's equal to E to the Katich. Right.
But there are more of those. There's not just this one. You could take like an initial amount of stuff,
like the initial amount of money in your bank account to the initial number of cells if you're modeling exponential population growth or something.
So you get then to here. So right there, you're taking a linear combination of a single vector.
And because it's a one by one matrix, there was only one function that you needed to look for that would satisfy this condition.
When we start going to larger matrices, all we're doing is we're considering then systems of differential equations where I'm taking now.
I have one function where when I differentiate, it is k times some other function.
Then I have another function that's equal to something. Times the derivatives of those original functions.
So you have more conditions that are coming up. The simplest instance I can tell you where this comes up is where you just take an oscillator,
where you're just going back and forth a mass on a spring already right there.
We are led to a system of two linear equations.
So. There are many other instances where you might study differential equations of this form, so you might want techniques for solving them.
The main technique we have for solving them is to then look for eigenvalues and eigenvectors of your associated matrix.
The reason for that is because it turns your differential equation into one where you can solve it more simply.
OK. So there are two perspectives that you can kind of take on this problem.
One is this kind of geometric perspective that I'm trying to describe where we look at a general solution.
And you say, Well, what do these general solutions look like?
Well, for any T along this line, for any function along this line, your populations will or your quantities will go off to infinity.
That's interesting to know from a qualitative perspective,
if you're studying like pollution spread and you know that under the current model, things are just going to keep blowing up.
That might be something you might want to intervene in if, on the other hand,
things were collapsing down to zero and that's modeling your population, that could also be bad.
So you want to think about like,
what are you representing in this qualitative behavior might give you an idea of what you want to do with that information.
So here what we want to do is from these solutions we're getting, we want to know how do they work?
When you take one of those particular solutions, like you do some experiment, you go to the pond,
you measure this many fish in the pond and that allows you to solve for a
specific constancy one here and a specific constancy to from the experiments,
from the measurements you've done. Now that's going to determine some kind of a behavior as time goes on.
Is it going to spiral around and just kind of was it going to just go in a circle?
Is it going to oscillate? I mean, if you're modeling mosquitoes, I mean, when we do this in one B, we often do the example of spraying for mosquitoes.
If you spray for mosquitoes in the wrong portion of their cycle of the population growth cycle,
you can actually lead to a larger increase in the number of population of the mosquitoes.
So the intervention that you do actually really matters in the timing of when you do it.
So you want to have an understanding of what these solution trajectories look like in order to know when you might intervene.
So here I want to know what these this solution looks like.
I don't. In this context, it's not representing anything in particular other than a bunch of points in the plan.
So I want to know what happens as T goes to infinity. Well, that's going to depend on what C one and C two are.
So the next case we need to understand is if C one is equal to zero.
So you don't have this part and you only have this part. Well, then that means it's going to be a vector.
So C two and e to the minus T, all those do is scale a particular vector.
So every output will then be along the line determined by the span of negative one one.
So if I draw this vector negative one one, this is my eigen space corresponding to the eigenvalue of negative one.
Now you want to know what happens as T gets larger in this case, because it's e to the minus T,
I'm then going to be going towards the origin, so I'll be moving this way along this IGen space towards the origin.
So that also tells you something interesting.
If you happen to be near zero and maybe you perturb the solution a little bit, you might wonder what will happen.
Well, if I happen to perturb it in the direction of the minus one I space, I just get pushed back to zero.
If I pushed it a little bit in the direction of the E four again space, then I get pulled off to infinity.
So at this point where the behavior is fundamentally different in two different directions, we then call a saddle point.
It's like you're at a mountain pass or something and you want to know which direction will the ball rolling.
We'll be perfectly push it up the sides of the mountain pass. It might come back to that point.
But if you had any component down the other side of the mountain pass, it will just fall off.
So now you might wonder, well, what if you had C one and C two, they're both non-zero?
Well, how does the growth of E to the four T compare to eat the minus T?
How do these functions compare? How do they compare?
Matthew? It grows at a much faster rate.
Right, so if T gets really large, this thing is basically zero and this thing is the only one that's dominating.
So then it gets really large that tells you that you're going to be parallel to the E for IGen space.
So when you have your solutions coming out, if you were on this IGen space and you perturbed your solution a little bit off,
well, then that means you get pulled towards this IGen space E4 because that eigenvalue was bigger.
Similarly, over here, I would get pulled towards the E eigen space if I got perturbed off this line a little
bit like I added some mosquitoes or something and I get pushed this direction.
If I got pushed down, then I get pushed to be parallel to the E for eigen space.
And that's coming from these exponents just from our knowledge of pre-calculus.
How do exponential functions grow? This grows much more quickly than this one does.
So your funked your outputs are going to be then parallel to this space where essentially parallel because this one gets very small.
So this picture gives us an idea of what's going to happen for the entire system, for wherever we are.
We know, roughly speaking, what's going to happen. Depending on what your eigenvalues are, you can get different behavior.
So, for instance, if both of my eigenvalues were, then so in this case, I have one that's negative and one that's positive.
What do you think would happen if they were both positive?
Then we're probably going to we're going to be pushed away from the origin in both directions.
And in this case, you would call in both directions are going to be pushed away like E for so be going pushed away because the exponents are positive.
And so then in that case, you would call the origin, then you would call it a source or a repeller.
Everything is pushed away from the origin. You make a small change to your system.
You get pushed off to infinity in any direction. If you had two negative eigenvalues, what do you think would happen?
Our shooter. It's a sink, it's a sink or in a tractor, everything gets pushed towards the origin.
And again, the way that they get pushed towards the origin is exactly according to the magnitudes of those eigenvalues and the direction eigen spaces.
So there are a few different ways that you can think about that when you think about what I can fit in this last.
Six minutes. What will be the most beneficial for you?
I'm my mom. I guess I want to emphasize more the linear algebra.
There are some other examples here, and certainly for some of you, depending on what courses you want to take next.
There, you probably want to know a little bit more about the differential equations.
It's also a great beginning point for a project idea to go further in this direction.
Instead of this particular approach, what I'd like to do is to connect this back to not the geometric view, but this view of diagnosing.
So let's try that for the last few minutes. So another perspective.
If you are very interested in differential equations for maybe what the coursework you need to do next.
There's certainly plenty you could do for a final project, but we'll also recommend the course and 105,
which is a differential equations course in the applied math department for the math department.
If you're interested in differential equations in support of physics, math one 10 is sort of the canonical course to take.
Which picks up with some of these ideas. So if we have this picture.
Uh. The differential equation y prime is equal to a times y.
Well, recall, the whole point of what we've been doing was the diagonals so we could try to diagonals at.
So if a is diagonal sizable.
Going wise of all. Then. A is equal to P D P Inverse by the dog analyzation theorem.
So the diagnostician theorem tells us this when the case where p is your event,
you're a matrix of eigenvectors, you one through the end and D is your diagonal matrix with your eigenvalues.
So we have that situation. And let's, in fact, specialized to end as equal to two, because we've mostly been working with two by two matrices anyway.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to change coordinates. I'm going to work in the basis of eigenvectors.
So instead of working with why I'm going to work with X, so X will then be p inverse times y.
So remember that change is coordinates from Y, the standard coordinates to the basis of eigenvectors.
OK, well now we'd like to know what your what is your differential equation look like in this new coordinate system?
Well, if I take y prime, it's supposed to be equal to eight times y and I just plug in well, here y is then equal to P times X.
So we're just changing coordinates p times x prime will then be equal to a times b times x.
So if I differentiate P times X, it's just a p is just a matrix with no variables in it.
So it's just p times x prime. So A times, B, times X.
Well, A. Is equal to P D, P Inverse, because it's diagnosable.
Times X, times x. So the one thing we see is that the P, the P here and the P inverse, they cancel out.
So I then have p times X is equal to p d times x.
Now I have a pee here and a pea here, so I can multiply in the left by inverse.
And this then gives me ex prime. Ex prime is equal to D times X.
And let's just do that really quickly. My last two minutes for a two by two matrix.
So that's saying we have a situation x one prime x two prime is equal to this diagonal matrix lambda one zero zero lambda two times x one x two.
So if I multiply this out, I then get X one time X to prime is then equal to lambda one x one lambda two x two.
So I get a system of two equations. So I got X one prime is equal to lambda one x one lambda, two prime is equal to lambda two x two.
These two equations are really nice because this equation doesn't involve the other one at all.
It's a totally a calc one problem. Now you're just looking for some function of one variable that when you differentiate,
it is equal to lambda one times the original function so that you can tell, I can tell you exactly will be X.
One of T is equal to see one. E to the lambda, one t same thing here.
This is then X two of T is equal to C to Tanzi Lambda two T.
So in this coordinate system, when we change to a basis of eigenvectors, it was to calc one problems to solve.
It wasn't this complicated system of differential equations to solve.
So then working in that diagonal coordinate system in the eigen basis, it made our system of differential equations much easier to study.
So that's sort of the point of doing this is that when we change into this nicer coordinate system,
we get a system of differential equations that don't involve any of the other variables and then are much easier to solve.
So then when you want to know solutions back in the usual coordinate system, you just change coordinates back to get your answer.
And you would get the exact same answer as before.
So what I wanted to do today is just to give you a brief taste of what some applications to differential equations would look like.
There are certainly many more directions you could take.
We didn't get to do a systematic analysis of what all the different eigenvalues could tell you.
You might also wonder what a geometric perspective in our three would look like.
And now, instead of having the phase portrait in the plane,
you have the face portrait in space and you've got your curves spiraling around and it can be much more interesting.
This comes up a lot when you're doing sort of biological modeling as well, you're modeling the heart,
beating very quickly or modeling people breathing in and out or neurons firing in the brain.
You get these sorts of systems of differential equations showing up quite a lot.
And you use linear methods to solve them as much as possible. All right.
I apologize for going one minute over. I'll see all of you, hopefully on Friday.